Romanian Reports in Physics, Vol. 68, Supplement, P. S233–S274, 2016

COMBINED LASER GAMMA EXPERIMENTS AT ELI-NP
K. HOMMA1,2, O. TESILEANU3,*, L. D’ALESSI3, T. HASEBE1, A. ILDERTON4, T. MORITAKA5,
Y. NAKAMIYA6, K. SETO3, H. UTSUNOMIYA7, Y. XU3

1Graduate

School of Science, Hiroshima University, Higashihiroshima, Hiroshima, Japan

2International
3ELI-NP,

Center for Zetta-Exawatt Science and Technology, École Polytechnique

“Horia Hulubei” National Institute for Physics and Nuclear Engineering, 30 Reactorului
Street, RO-077125, Bucharest-Magurele, Romania

4Department

5Department

6Institute
7Department

of Applied Physics, Chalmers University of Technology, Maskingrand 2, 412 58
Gothenberg, SE-41296, Sweden

of Physics, National Central University, No.300, Jhongda Rd., Jhongli District, Taoyuan
city 32001, Taiwan
of Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Gokasho, Uji-city, Kyoto, 611-001, Japan
of Physics, Konan University, 8-9-1, Okamoto, Higashi-nada, Kobe, Hyogo, 658-8501,
Japan
*Corresponding

author E-mail: ovidiu.tesileanu@eli-np.ro

Abstract. We propose experiments in the E7 and E4 experimental areas at
ELI-NP to tackle problems of fundamental physics, taking advantage of the unique
configuration and characteristics of the new research infrastructure to be constructed
in Magurele, Romania. The experimental setups proposed follow a gradual approach
from the point of view of complexity, from the “Day 1” experiments to experiments
for which the prerequisites include results from the previously performed ones. In
addition, there are two generic Research and Development tasks proposed in this
Technical Design Report (TDR), related to the development of a detection system,
Gamma Polari-Calorimeter (GPC), commonly applicable to energy measurements for
electrons, positrons and gamma-rays above the 0.1 GeV energy scale and the
preparatory tests for laser plasma acceleration of electrons up to necessary energies
210 MeV, 2.5 GeV and 5 GeV for the later stage experiments, respectively. In this
paper we particularly focus on possible “Day-1” topics and briefly mention the future
extensions foreseen.
Key words: High-intensity laser, LINAC based gamma-ray source, isomers,
photoexcitation, dark matter survey, 4-wave mixing, gamma polari-calorimeter, nonlinear QED, radiation reaction, pair production, gamma-gamma collider, vacuum
birefringence

S234

K. Homma et al.

2

1. INTRODUCTION
This TDR is the result of the collaboration between the authors and the ELINP employees and scientists from universities and research institutes from Japan
and Korea.
The contributors from ELI-NP, in alphabetical order are: Sohichiroh Aogaki,
Bertrand Boisdeffre, Mihail Cernaianu, Ioan Dancus, Dan Filipescu, Cristian Petcu,
Mihai Risca and Zafar Yasin.
The external contributors are: Yasuo Arai (KEK, Japan), Masaki Hashida
(Kyoto University, Japan), Yoshihisa Iwashita (Kyoto University, Japan), Masaki
Kando (JAEA, Japan), James Koga (JAEA, Japan), Tetsuro Kumita (Tokyo
Metropolitan University), Kayo Matsuura (Hiroshima University, Japan), Kazuhisa
Nakajima (Institute for Basic Science, Korea), Shuji Sakabe (Kyoto University,
Japan).

Figure 1 - The Physics cases in RA5-TDR (early half plan).

3

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S235

Figure 2 - The work space for the proposals in RA5-TDR.

This proposal includes two main topics in physics with staged developments
to gradually tackle them. The first is nuclear reactions, linked to the possibility to
reach, at ELI-NP, conditions encountered in the interior of stars – the production
and photoexcitation of isomers is proposed. The second topic is probing the
photon-photon interactions below the MeV energy scale in general which have not
been explored thoroughly to date by utilizing the laser-laser, laser-gamma and
gamma-gamma collision systems. By these various combinations of photon beams,
we can test sub-eV Dark Matter scenarios as well as nonlinear Quantum
Electrodynamics (QED) effects both in perturbative and non-perturbative regimes.
It also includes the laser-electron scattering for the fundamental tests on the
radiation mechanisms and pair production via the tunneling process in extremely
high-intensity laser fields. The laser-electron experiment also aims at the
generation of polarized gamma-rays from sub-GeV to GeV as probes for the later
stage experiments to explore the vacuum birefringence under high-intensity laser
fields. Considering all of the above, we define several sections for the experiments
performed at E7 and E4 experimental areas (Figure 1 and Figure 28 in Chapter 4).
We define experimental stages and the flow charts depending on the
experimental areas, Research and Development subjects, and combinations of
beam sources necessary for individual experimental proposals is shown in Figure 1,
where abbreviations L, e, γ and A correspond to laser, electron, gamma-ray beams
and nucleus targets, respectively.
“Stage 1” experiments correspond to technically less difficult proposals based
on available beam sources within the current ELI-NP design.
At E7 the production of isomers by using MeV electrons produced with one
1 PW/10 PW laser line and the excitation with gamma radiations from the Gamma

S236

K. Homma et al.

4

Beam System (GBS) will be measured via the observation of neutron emission.
There are two irradiation modes in the production and photoexcitation of isomers:
synchronized and non-synchronized irradiations of laser photons and gamma
photons. These experiments are referred as “Production and Photoexcitation of
isomers experiments” or RA5-PPEx.
At E4 the search for weakly coupling sub-eV Dark Matter (RA5-DM) with
two 0.1 PW lasers and then two 1 PW lasers, will be performed. This is the
simplest experiment that utilizes only the laser beams in vacuum chambers.
The prime Research and Development topic necessary for the following stages 1.5,
3 and 4 is the development of the common detector, Gamma Polari-Calorimeter
(GPC), to measure momenta of e+ and e-, energies of gamma-rays above 0.1 GeV
and the degree of linear polarization of gamma-rays via the conversion process to
e+e−. We refer to this Research and Development topic as RA5-GPC.
The second Research and Development subject is the generation of 210 MeV,
2.5 GeV and 5.0 GeV electron beams based on Laser Plasma Acceleration (LPA)
with gas cells for experimental proposals for the future upgrades.
Though we will perform proof-of-principle experiments at existing
infrastructures prior to the operational phase of ELI-NP, we do not include specific
proposals for this subject in our TDR, because other ELI-NP TDR teams also plan
this kind of experiments and we will share the relevant technical information by the
time of commissioning in 2018.
“Stage 1.5” proposals are fundamental tests on radiation reaction (RA5-RR),
on pair production (RA5-Pair) and on degrees of linear polarization (RA5-Pol) via
the extremely non-linear process in extremely high-intensity laser fields by
combining 600 MeV electrons from the LINAC (ELI-NP Gamma Beam System)
and a 10 PW laser at E7. All proposed measurements are possible with the GPC.
These experiments can be an alternative proposal to the E7 stage-1
experiment (RA5-PPEx) which shares the common interaction chamber at E7.
Depending on the advances of the preparatory experiments relevant to RA5-PPEx
and on the decision to construct the electron transport line to E7, the staging order
between L(e) + + A (RA5-PPEx) and e (0.6 GeV) + L (RA5-RR, -Pair, -Pol) may
be swapped. The stage 1.5 proposals require an additional electron transport line to
the E7 area in order to get the accurately controlled stable electron bunches from
the LINAC (of the Gamma Beam System). Also an additional Compton-scatteringbased calibration system to synchronize one electron bunch with a 10 PW laser
pulse must be in place. The electron bunches will arrive to E7 from the LINAC
with a lower repetition rate of 1 Hz instead of 100 Hz, to reduce the electron
current for the beam dump in E7. Therefore, it is foreseen to guide 1 PW laser
pulses operated at 1 Hz into the E7 area (through the existing 10 PW beamlines)
which is synchronized with 10 PW with a fixed time difference in advance.
However, these additional implementations do not pose difficulties from the
technical point of view.

5

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S237

Based on the following basic parameters for 0.1 PW, 1 PW and 10 PW lasers
and for electrons from GBS LINAC, we briefly introduce in the following subsections the physics cases listed above.
Table 1
Parameters of the available laser output.

Power

0.1 PW

1 PW

10 PW

Pulse energy

2.2 J

22 J

220 J

Pulse duration

22 fs

22 fs

22 fs

Wave length

820 nm

820 nm

820 nm

Table 2
Parameters of the electron beam from GBS LINAC as used in the proposals.

Parameter

Value

Energy

600MeV

Bunch charge

4.5-100pC

Number of electrons (avg)

109

Energy spread FWHM

0.1%

Spot size

15 μm

Bunch length

100

Rep. rate of M27 kicking

1 Hz

Divergence

0.5 mm mrad

2. STAGE 1
2.1.

Production and Photoexcitation of Isomers (RA5-PPEX)
2.1.1. Physics case

In nuclear astrophysics [1, 2], the reaction rate (  n ), that is the number of
reactions taking place per unit time, for a photoreaction induced on a ground-state
nucleus leading to the emission of a neutron is given by

S238

K. Homma et al.

6



 n   cn ( E )  n ( E )dE ,

(2.1.1)

0

where c is the speed of light,   n the photoneutron cross sections, and n ( E ) the
number of photons per unit volume at energy E . In a stellar interior at a
temperature T , n ( E ) is remarkably close to a black-body or Planck distribution:
1 1
E2
n ( E , T )dE  2
dE .
(2.1.2)
 ( c )3 exp( E / kT )  1
When Eq. (2.1.2) is substituted for n ( E ) in Eq. (2.1.1), the rate becomes a
function of parameter T . It is then possible to define the photon energy range
which is the most relevant for determining  n (T ) at the temperature of
astrophysical interest. This results from the properties of the integrand of Eq.
(2.1.1), the product of the photoneutron cross section   n ( E ) and the Planck
distribution n ( E ) . The integrand differs significantly from zero only in a
relatively small energy range defined immediately above neutron threshold. We
call this range the Gamow window for photoneutron reactions. Figure 3 illustrates
this Gamow window.
In stellar environments, nuclear excited states are thermally populated. Figure
4 depicts photoexcitation on a thermally populated excited state. At high
temperatures, thermalization may enhance the photoreaction rates by several orders
of magnitudes.

Figure 3 - The Gamow window for photoneutron reactions defined immediately above neutron
threshold Sn. A narrow energy window is defined as the product of the photoneutron cross section and
the Planck distribution.

7

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S239

Figure 4 - Photoexcitation on the excited state.

The right-hand side of Eq. (2.1.1), which corresponds to photodisintegration
from the ground state only, must be replaced by a sum of the rates n (T ) for
photodisintegration from all (ground and excited) states  , each term being
weighted by the appropriate Boltzmann factor. Thus, the astrophysical reaction rate
 * is defined by
1
2J   1 
(2.1.3)
*n (T ) 
 n (T )exp(   / kT )

G (T )  2 J 0  1

where
2J   1
(2.1.4)
exp(   / kT )
0
 2J  1
is the temperature-dependent partition function of the target nucleus. Note that in
n (T ) ,   n ( E ) is replaced by the cross section  n ( E ) for photodisintegration

( E ) is determined by the
from state  . Photoexcitation strength function f XL

photoabsorption cross section  XL ( E ) summed over all possible spins of the final
states [3]:

E 2 L 1  XL
(E)

f XL
( E ) 
(2.1.5)
2
( c ) 2 L  1
Here, X represents the electric (E) or magnetic (M) excitation mode and L the
multipolarity.
Although nuclear reactions naturally take place not only on the ground state
but also on excited states thermally populated in the interior of stars, closed nuclear
systems at high temperatures and densities formed by the gravitational force, they
are induced only on the ground state in experimental laboratories on Earth. As a

result, there is no experimental information on  n ( E ) ,  XL
( E ) , and f XL ( E ) for
G (T )  

S240

K. Homma et al.

8

total

any excited state  . Note that  n ( E )   XL TXL,n TXL
  XL
( E ) , where TXL,n is the
total
neutron transmission coefficient and TXL the sum of all particle and radiative
transmission coefficients. Above neutron threshold (E > Sn: neutron separation
total
energy), TXL
is generally dominated by TXL,n which becomes zero at Sn. Due to a
lack of the experimental information, the Hauser-Feshbach statistical model is used

total
to calculate  XL
, and  n ( E ) , assuming that the gamma-ray
( E ) , TXL,n , TXL


strength function f XL ( E ) is the same as the one for the ground state (Brink
hypothesis [4]). Thus, it is indispensable to experimentally investigate stellar
photoreactions in the laboratory.
The ELI-NP may become the first research laboratory where stellar
photoreactions are induced and detected. We propose an experiment to induce
stellar photoreactions at E7 by producing isomers with the high power lasers and
photo-exciting isomers with the intense gamma-ray beam.
The experiments of producing the isomers may be performed either by
multiple laser shots (Type I) or a single laser shot (Type II) of the 10 PW lasers. An
isomer is produced in the inelastic electron scattering or in a photoabsorption
reaction, leaving a nucleus in either bound states or unbound states; the bound
states decay to the isomeric state via γ-transition [5], while the unbound states
undergo neutron emission followed by γ-transition to the isomeric state [6]. Laseraccelerated electrons with kinetic energies of the order of MeV followed by the
subsequent production of Bremsstrahlung radiation most effectively produce
isomers. Therefore, a key technology is to produce a vast number of MeV electrons
by laser acceleration suited to the production of isomers, by optimizing the
operation condition of the laser with the pulse width of femtosecond.
The Type I experiment is applicable to long-lived isomers with half-lives
sufficiently longer than the frequency (1/60 Hz) of the 10 PW laser. The production
of a large number of long-lived isomers is required in the first step followed by
subsequent irradiations with a gamma-ray beam in the second step to photo-excite
the isomers. In contrast, the Type II experiment is applicable to all isomers
irrespective of their half-lives because isomers are produced by a single laser shot
and simultaneously irradiated with a gamma-ray beam that is synchronized to the
laser shot. Since the laser shot and the gamma-ray irradiation are synchronized in a
time interval of the order of ps, the Type II experiment is also applicable to excited
state with half-lives comparable to the synchronization time. The signal-to-noise
ratio, limited by the fact that a relatively small number of isomers are produced by
a single laser shot is greatly improved by applying a short time gate for the
synchronized irradiation of laser and gamma-ray beams. A Type II experiment for
an isomer 155Gdm with a half-life of 32 ms is depicted in Figure 5. Table 3 lists
isomers of research interest.

9

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S241

Figure 5 - Schematic image of the 4π neutron detector structure, proposed in the ELI-NP TDR
“Gamma Above Neutron Threshold”.

Table 3
Isomers of research interest

Isomers
189
Osm
180
Tam
176
Lum
155
Gdm
152
Eum
115 m
In
113
Cdm
85
Krm

J
9/2−
9−
1−
11/2−
0−
1/2−
11/2−
1/2−

Ex
30.8 keV
75.3 keV
123 keV
121 keV
45.6 keV
336 keV
263 keV
305 keV

Half-life
5.81 h
> 1.2 x 1015 y
3.66 h
31.97 ms
9.27 y
4.49 h
14.1 y
4.48 h

Photoexcitation of isomers is verified by detecting photoneutrons. The
Gdm isomers with the spin-parity of 11/2− and the excitation energy 121 keV are
photo-excited just above the neutron threshold at 6635 keV by a highly
monochromatic gamma-ray beam with an energy spread 0.5% (33keV) in FWHM
at energies between 6514 and 6635 keV. Thus, photoneutron emission occurs on
155
Gd not in the ground state but in the isomeric state. The neutron detection is
carried out in collaboration with the research group “Gamma above Neutron
Threshold”.
155

2.1.2. Technical proposal

The proposed experiment of the production and photoexcitation of isomers
requires the following preparatory Research and Development:

S242

K. Homma et al.

10

1) A preparatory investigation of laser acceleration of electrons with the 1 PW laser
at the CETAL facility in Magurele. The peak power (1 PW) and pulse width of
the laser need to be modified and optimized to accelerate electrons in the MeV
region at high fluxes. A gas or solid target will be employed for this purpose (this
will be defined in a common ELI-NP – CETAL research project).
2) Test for the production of isomers with the 1 PW laser at the CETAL facility.
Production reactions of the inelastic electron scattering, (e, e’) and (e, e’ n), as
well as photoabsorption of the Bremsstrahlung photons, need to be investigated
with emphasis on the production efficiency of isomers.
The fundamental technology developed by the preparatory investigation will
be applied to the proposed experiment with the 10 PW laser and the gamma beam
at the ELI-NP facility. In the E7 experimental area it will be possible to use also
the 1 PW laser beam at 1 Hz repetition rate, transported through the 10 PW
beamline(s). A long focal-length parabolic focusing mirror, housed in a turning box
located in the E1/E6 experimental area, will allow for the use of the long focus
(9.5 m) at 1 PW and 10 PW. This is beneficial for electron acceleration in a gas
target, and specifically for this experiment we do not need very tight focus, a long
focal being desirable (Figure 6).

Figure 6 - Experimental setup of E7-Stage 1

11

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S243

Figure 7 - Schematic image of the 4π neutron detector structure, proposed in the ELI-NP TDR
“Gamma Above Neutron Threshold”.

The electrons accelerated with the help of the high-power laser will hit a first
target, of tungsten (W), to produce Bremsstrahlung radiation in the gamma domain.
Then, at a distance that depending on the isomer to be studied and on the geometry
of the electron acceleration and Bremsstrahlung setup may vary from a few mm to
a few cm, there is the second target, containing the nucleus of interest. By
irradiation with the Bremsstrahlung gamma-rays, part of the nuclei in this target
will reach (by direct and more preferably indirect feedings) the isomeric state to be
investigated.
At a next moment (after a delay depending on the lifetime of the isomeric
state), the target is irradiated with the gamma beam from GBS with an energy
tuned in such a way as to be slightly above the neutron threshold from the isomeric
state (but not also from the ground state) and the photoneutrons are detected.
At ELI-NP foreseen is the presence of a 4π array for neutron detection,
which is described in the “Gamma above Neutron Threshold” TDR (Figure 7). The
procedure for the purchase of the 3He detectors for this array already started.
Depending on the results of the preparatory experiments, the detectors will be
placed around the secondary (isomer) target, or a fast transport system will be
installed to transport the target to the 4π array after the irradiation with the
Bremsstrahlung gamma photons. In either case, the neutron detectors array will be
placed on the gamma radiation beam from GBS (and the photoexcitation of the
isomers created in the target shall occur when the target is in the 4π array).
2.1.3. Estimation Feasibility

There are several considerations that support the idea of performing this
experiment at ELI-NP. One of them is the availability of an intense, narrowbandwidth gamma radiation beam. Another one is the possibility to use high power
lasers for accelerating electrons and put the nuclei in the isomeric states of interest.

S244

K. Homma et al.

12

The signal to noise ratio for neutron detection is greatly enhanced by the fact
that only a small fraction of the time is covered by the gamma radiation pulses, the
macrobunches occupying only approximately 50 μs each second.
Due to the fact that the production of isomeric states is expected to be more
efficient with the help of gamma photons with respect to electron scattering,
envisaged is the use of a Bremsstrahlung target placed immediately after the
electron acceleration site (laser beam focus). In the lower panel of Figure 8,
displayed are the results of the GEANT4 simulation of the Bremsstrahlung spectra
originating from a W target on which 106 laser-accelerated electrons arrive with an
energy of 40 MeV and an energy spread of 1%.

Figure 8 - Energy spectrum (left panel) and angular-energy distribution (right panel) of
Bremsstrahlung gamma radiation photons exiting the primary W target.

Figure 9 - Left panel: Total cross-section for the production of the isomers as computed with TALYS
code. Right panel: population of the isomer state for three target thicknesses due to the irradiation
with the Bremsstrahlung radiation with the characteristics in Figure 8.

13

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S245

The number of electrons accelerated with the help of 1 PW or 10 PW lasers
can be estimated/extrapolated from previous experiments with existing, lower
power lasers [7]. The number of electrons accelerated by a 1 PW laser pulse in the
50 MeV range can be 1010, while for 10 PW this figure may be one order of
magnitude higher.
Isomers are populated through photoexcitation of mediating states at higher
excitation energies followed by gamma-transitions to the isomer. Considering only
the photons exiting the W target at small angles (within 10o) in the direction of the
incident electrons, one can estimate the number of isomers produced per laser shot.
In Figure 9 the population of the isomer state is presented for targets of widths of
10 μm, 100 μm and 1 mm and for 106 laser-accelerated electrons creating the
Bremsstrahlung distribution in Figure 8.
Taking as an example the 176Lum case, due to the quite large lifetime of the
isomeric state, several 1 PW laser shots can be used in order to excite the target.
For a 1-hour laser functioning, meaning a delivery of 3600 shots at 1 PW on target,
and assuming a secondary 176Lu target of 1 mm diameter on which consequently
the 8×108 ph/s (within the bandwidth) gamma beam hits, a count rate of about 0.3
neutron/second is expected in the 4π detector. By using a gate of equal duration
with the time (ms) needed for neutron moderation in the polyethylene for each
gamma macro-bunch, the signal to noise ratio is improved by a factor of 10.
For the short-lived isomers, such as 155Gdm (32 ms), they can be produced by
one shot of the 10 PW laser, then photo-excited by synchronized irradiations with a
single-shot of gamma micro-bunch followed by neutron detection with fast Li glass
scintillation detectors with a time gate 100 ns.
The preparatory experiments of laser acceleration of electrons aim to improve
these numbers by increasing the electron yield and optimizing the geometry of the
setup.
2.2. Search for sub-eV Dark Matter candidates at E4 (RA5-DM)
In this proposal we search for frequency up-shifted photons via four-wave
mixing in the vacuum caused by stimulated decay of resonantly produced DM
when two color lasers are combined and focused into the vacuum as illustrated in
Figure 10. Figure 11 shows the experimental setup we propose at E4.
A large fraction of dark components in the universe motivates us to search for
yet undiscovered ﬁelds to naturally interpret the relevant observations. Because we
know examples of resonance states coupling to two photons at 126 GeV (scalar
ﬁeld, Higgs) and 135 MeV (pseudoscalar ﬁeld, neutral pion) within only three
orders of magnitude on the mass scale, we may expect that there might be yet
undiscovered similar types of resonance states over much wider energy ranges in

S246

K. Homma et al.

14

nature, in particular, in the lower energy side if the coupling to two photons is so
weak that these dark ﬁelds are not discovered by conventional methods to date.
This encourages us to further search for resonance states at energy ranges below
1 MeV to which conventional charged particle colliders will never be able to
access.
There are actually theoretical rationales to expect sub-eV particles such as the
axion (pseudoscalar boson) [8] and the dilaton (scalar boson) [9] associated with
breaking of fundamental symmetries in the context of particle physics and
cosmology. Therefore, we are led to probe such ﬁelds via their coupling to twophotons in the sub-eV mass range. Furthermore, the advent of high-intensity laser
systems and the rapid intensity growth encourage the approach to probe weakly
coupling dark ﬁelds with optical photons by the enhanced luminosity factor [10,
11].
We therefore propose searches for resonantly produced dark ﬁelds with
quasi-parallel two-color laser-laser collider at E4 where two 100 TW lasers are
available and two 1 PW lasers will also be available if the beam transport at the
upstream is slightly reconfigured.

Figure 10 - Schematic view of quasi-parallel colliding system (QPS) between two incident photons
among a focused laser beam with the focal length f, the beam diameter d, and the upper range of
incident angles Δθ determined by geometric optics. The signature (2−u) ω is produced via the fourwave mixing process, 1ω + 1ω → (2−u) ω + u ω with 0 < u < 1 by mixing two-color waves with
diﬀerent frequencies 1ω and u ω in advance at the incidence.

15

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S247

Figure 11 - Arrangement of the basic components for the setup and the CAD drawing at E4 to
search for sub-eV Dark Matter via four-wave mixing in the vacuum.

S248

K. Homma et al.

16

Figure 12 - Upper limits on the coupling g/m- mass m relation for the scalar field exchange. As
references in Figure 12, we put existing upper limits by our pilot search (Search at Hiroshima) based
on this method [12] and also by the other types of scalar field searches by vertically shaded areas: the
ALPS experiment [13] (the sine function part of the sensitivity curve is simplified by unity for the
drawing purpose) which is one of the ”Light Shining through a Wall” (LSW) experiments, searching
for non-Newtonian forces based on the torsion balance techniques (Etö-wash [14], Stanford1 [15],
Stanford2 [16]) and the Casimir force measurement (Lamoreaux [17]). The domains below the
vertically shaded areas are all excluded. We note that if we require the proper polarization
combinations between initial and final states for pseudoscalar fields [10], we will be able to test the
QCD axion models in the near future. As a reference, we show the expected mass-coupling relation
based on the QCD axion scenario for E/N = 0 [18] (KSVZ model [19]) which is indicated by the
inclining dotted line. The pink horizontal line indicates the gravitational coupling limit.

Goal of this research: Even if no statistically significant four-wave mixing
signal is observed, it is possible to constrain fundamentally important theoretical
models for Dark Matter such as Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) axion scenarios
based on the mass-coupling relation of the exchanged fields as shown in Figure 12.
The accessible domains by the searches at ELI-NP are indicated by the two red
lines from the top to the bottom for cases where 0.1 PW with an OPA-based
inducing laser and 1 PW with an OPA-based inducing laser are assumed,
respectively. The assumed data taking periods are commonly about 10 days. The
red lines indicate that ELI-NP has the potential to test QCD axion scenarios in the

17

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S249

mass range 1−100 meV, corresponding to a sensitivity beyond the present world
record.

2.3. R&D for Gamma-Polari-Calorimeter (RA5-GPC)
Gamma Polari-Calorimeter (GPC) is the common detector system that will be
employed in Stage 1.5 and 3 at E7 as illustrated in conceptual drawing (Figure 13)
and CAD drawing (Figure 14).
GPC is designed to measure incident gamma-ray energies via the conversion
process to e+e− pairs and simultaneously measures the degree of linear polarization.
The energy and polarization of gamma-rays are determined by the pairwise
reconstruction on the basis of one-by-one tracking of electrons and positrons.
Therefore, a part of GPC is also applicable to a spectrometer of e+ and e−
individually without the gamma-conversion target.
GPC has capabilities of measuring ten pairs per shot and covering the energy
range of 0.1−5.0 GeV. The inclusive momentum resolution of GPC for e+ and eabove 0.2 GeV is 6.5% (Figure 15), assuming incident gamma-ray energy is 1.0
GeV.

Figure 13 - Conceptual drawing for Gamma Polari-Calorimeter (GPC). Note that the typical e+eopening angle is around sub-mrad. The angle at the top-view is exaggerated.

S250

K. Homma et al.

18

Figure 14 - A CAD drawing for GPC.

Figure 15 - Inclusive momentum resolution of produced e+ (closed circle) and e- (open circle) above
0.2 GeV.

3. STAGE 1.5
In this setup, we will investigate radiation reaction (RA5-RR), e-e+ pair
production (RA5-Pair) and polarization (RA5-Pol) at E7. We can carry out these 3
experiments simultaneously, therefore the considered experimental setup in this
stage is only one configuration (Table 4 and Figure 16).

19

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S251

Table 4
Parameters for experiments

Electron energy bunch size Laser energy Intensity duration spot size
source
[MeV]
[μm]
[J]
[W/cm2]
[fs]
[μm]
22
accelerator
600
15
220
(1-2)×10
22
5.6

Figure 16 - Experimental setup of E7-Stage 1.5.

S252

K. Homma et al.

20

3.1. Radiation Reaction
3.1.1. Introduction/Physics Case

The following descriptions of the physics case are partially based on the
recent publication [20] by the author of this section. That paper was intended to
propose very briefly an experiment for ELI-NP including the theoretical
explanations. And also we extracted the proposal of RA5-RR from Technical
Design Report for Research Activity 5 – Combined Laser and Gamma Experiments
(RA5-TDR) after adding new information for this present paper.
Ultrahigh intense lasers are being planned and constructed [21] including
ELI-NP [22]. What kind of physical processes can we observe in the regime of
these laser intensities? We often discuss QED effects like pair creation/annihilation
by extreme intensities of 1024 W/cm2 [22]. It has been predicted that these lasers
will produce new high-field physics. Before reaching this physical process, we
need to pass through the region of 1021 − 1022 W/cm2. In this regime, it is predicted
that an electron will emit significant energy as light. Therefore, the motion of the
electron needs to be corrected by the radiation feedback [23, 24]. This is a basic
physical process, named “radiation reaction (RR)”. This effect will be appear in the
regime of this laser intensities. All materials have electrons in atoms, and the part
of these will be freed from the potential of atoms, then they emit strong light via
the interaction with the high-intensity fields. Therefore, the RR process becomes
very important for all experiments with ultra-intense lasers at intensities over
1022 W/cm2.
These intensities are enough reasonable to aim by using ELI-NP two
10 PW lasers. In our group RA5-TDR considers to use E7 experimental area in
ELI-NP, we can use the two 10 PW lasers and the electron LINAC (max 720 MeV)
for gamma-ray sources here. By combining these large devices, we intend to carry
out to examine radiation reaction (RA5-RR), pair creation (RA5-Pair), observing
polarization of radiation (RA5-Pol) and vacuum birefringence (RA5-VBir) under
the high-intensity laser fields. In this chapter, we present the detail of our proposal
for the RA5-RR experiment in RA5-TDR (HPLS-TDR3) group.
Although many readers may indeed argue that this is very obvious and basic
physics, however the RR remains one of the difficult problems in the basic
equation of a radiating electron motion, namely “run-away” as an instability of its
self-acceleration. The standard theory of it was formulated by Lorentz [25],
Abraham [26] and Dirac [27]. Therefore, the equation of a radiating electron
motion is named the “Lorentz-Abraham-Dirac” (LAD) equation. The easiest way
to derive this equation is, from the radiation energy loss formula (Larmor’s formula
[28]) in the non-relativistic regime [29, 30].

21

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S253

2

dE
 dv 
(3.1.1)
 m0 0  
dt non-relativistic
 dt 
Where, m0 is the electron rest mass, v  E 3 is the velocity of the electron
3
( E is a 3-dimensional Euclidian space). c is denoted as the speed of light,
 0  e2 6 0m0c3   (1024 ) . Therefore, the energy change of an electron is as
follows ( Fex  E 3 is an external field.):

d  m0 v 2 
 dv 
(3.1.2)

  Fex  v  m0 0   .
dt  2 
 dt 
From this equation, we can obtain the equation of motion named the LorentzAbraham (LA) equation.
dv
(3.1.3)
m0
 Fex  FLA
dt
d 2v
FLA  m0 0 2 .
(3.1.4)
dt
Here, our dynamics is in t  [tinitial , tfinal ]  R with the periodic conditions in
which
dv
dv
(3.1.5)
v(tinitial )  v(tfinal ),
(tinitial )  (tfinal )
dt
dt
are required. Equation (3.1.4) is the effect of RR, named “the RR force”. Equation
(3.1.3) with (3.1.4) was converted to the relativistic regime by Dirac without any
mathematical condition like Eq. (3.1.5). This is the LAD equation.
d 
(3.1.6)
m0
w  eFex w  f LAD 
d
m   d 2 w   d 2 w  
f LAD   02 0 
w 
w  w
(3.1.7)
c  d 2
d 2

2

where all of vectors in this equation belong to the 4-dimensional linear vector
space VM 4 joining in Minkowski spacetime ( A4 , g ) which is the mathematical set
of the 4-dimensional affine space A 4 and the Lorentz metric g with the signature
of (, , , ) . The force of f LAD  VM 4 is the effect of the radiation feedback,
denoted the RR force.
At first, the LAD theory is developed as the electron’s model in classical
dynamics instead of the Dirac equation for avoiding the infinity in QED. After that
it was solved via renormalization [31-33], but he had tried to apply the Lorentz
model (1906) [25] for that. A part of an electron with the spherical charge
distribution interacts with other parts of itself. But, the field at the center of this
charge becomes a singular point (since | E | r 2 , r  0 | E |  ). We need to
keep in mind that the electron is treated as a point charge in classical physics. This
dependence is taken over the electromagnetic mass,

S254

K. Homma et al.

22

r 0
3  0c
(3.1.8)
m0   .
4 r
In the Lorentz’s theory, RR is derived from only the retarded field [34, 35].
The equation of electron’s motion (Eq. (3.1.3) with Eq.(3.1.4)) becomes
dv
d 2v
(3.1.9)
 m0  mEM   e  E + v  B   m0 0 2 .
dt
dt
Dirac considered that the infinity of QED is equivalent to the infinity of the
electromagnetic mass [36]. In Dirac’s method, he treated not only the retarded field,
but also the advanced field [27]. Then, the equation which he obtained is the LAD
equation (3.1.6) with Eq. (3.1.7). However, these equations have a mathematical
difficulty which is named “run-away”. For instance, we consider the case without
any external fields. In this case,
dv
d 2v
 m0  mEM   m0 0 2
dt
dt
 m  mEM t 
dv
dv

(t )  (0)  exp  0
(3.1.10)
.
dt
dt
0 
 m0

mEM 

Here,  0 is a very small value with the order of 10-24 sec, the solution grows
up rapidly since t /  0 is significant due to the second order derivative
m0 0 d 2 v dt 2 , namely the Schott term. This self-accelerating effect is the run-away
solution which we need to avoid. The same problem is in the LAD equation, too.
RR has involved the history of the single electron model on how to avoid the runaway and the concrete problem how to estimate this effect under the interactions
between ultrahigh-intensity lasers and highly energetic electrons in many ELI-NP
experiments.
As we discussed above, we need to investigate the method of the solution for
the run-away problem for the estimation of the count-rates for the PW class laser
experiments like ELI-NP. In this small section, we pick up some useful method for
RR researches.
For the avoidance of run-away solution, many methods have been proposed
and used for simulations like PIC. The standard method for the avoidance of runaway was suggested by Eliezer, Ford-O’Connel and Landau-Lifshitz. They
considered the term of the RR force as the higher order corrections. Therefore, the
RR force term is treated by the first order of perturbations. By replacing the Schott
term m0d 2 w d 2 with d ( eFex w ) / d in the radiation reaction force,
d 
 e  d ( Fex w )  d ( Fex w )  
m0
w  eFex w  02 
w 
w  w (3.1.11)
d
c 
d
d

derived by Eliezer [37] and Ford-O’Connel [38]. For PIC simulations, the external
fields is the function of spacetime, Fex  Fex ( x ( ) )  VM 4  VM 4 . Using the chain

23

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S255

rule of derivative in Eq. (3.1.11), we can obtain the force of Landau-Lifshitz
equation [39]:
m0

d 
e
 e2
w  eFex w  02 w w   Fex  40  c 2 Fex Fex  w  Fex Fex  w w w   .
d
c
c m0
(3.1.12)

Of course, f ex  VM 4 is an external force defined by f ex  eFex w . Since
this method doesn’t have a run-away due to the absence of the Schott term, it is
useful for the reference of simulations. A scheme similar to this was obtained by
Rohrlich [40].
Another method is to use the Sokolov equation. This is similar to LandauLifshitz equation (3.1.12), but it can be installed the radiation spectrum. For
example, we can obtain the following equations when we choose the classical
radiation spectrum.
dp 
dx
I
(3.1.13)
 eFex   2cl 2 p 
d
d m0 c
dx  p   0 f ex
.
(3.1.14)


d
m0
m0
Here, I cl   0 m0  g  f ex f ex means the classical radiation (the Larmor’s
formula) [41]. Then, we consider QED-based radiation formula I QED  q(  )  I cl
with

9 3  1
q(  ) 
dr r   dr  K 5 3 ( r )   2 rr K 2 3 ( r )  ,
(3.1.15)



0
r
8
 
C  m0c ,   3 2  C m0c2  (  g f ex  f ex )1 2 and r  r (1   r ) . This result
was derived from QED calculation [42, 43]. By using this QED-based radiation
formula, He proposed the upgraded equations [44]:
I
dp 
(3.1.16)
 eFex w  QED
p
d
m02 c 2
dx  p  I QED  0 f ex
(3.1.17)


d
m0
I cl m0
Characteristics of this model are, (1) it can realize the main behavior of a
radiating electron by QED-based radiation and (2) the fact that the equations satisfy
the relation p p   (m0c)2 but don’t satisfy w w  c 2 . The latter point should be
discussed on the mathematical point of view.
One of the authors in this paper, Seto has also suggested a series of new
models, based on the propagation of fields in the QED vacuum fluctuation
proposed by Heisenberg and Euler, in another word as the correction of vacuum

S256

K. Homma et al.

24

permittivity  0 . By correcting radiation from electron via the QED vacuum
fluctuation (the modified propagation of photons), we can derive the equation,
namely the Seto-Zhang-Koga (SZK) equation,
d 
e
(3.1.18)
w 
 Fex  FLAD   w
d
m0 [1   f ( FLAD )]
FLAD

x  x  



m0 0  d 2 w
d 2w 

w

w



ec 2  d 2
d 2 

(3.1.19)

(   4 2 3 0 / 45m04c3 and f ( F )   F | F  defined by  A | B  A B ) [20, 45].
Then, this equation was upgraded to the “Seto I” model as follows [46]:
dw 
dm
  dE  F w
(3.1.20)
d
  
dE 
e
  

g
g


g
(
F
)

.
(3.1.21)
dm
m0 [1   f (F )] 
2! 
Here, g ( F )  7 4   F | F  and F  VM 4  VM 4 means the dual tensor of
F . We should note that dE  and dm are the measure for the charge and the
mass on the Minkowski spacetime ( A4 , g ) , satisfying dE   dE  dm  dm .
F  Fex  FLAD and it includes radiation-external field interactions via  FLAD | Fex 
and  FLAD | *Fex  . In addition, it proceeded the more general model including
QED-based synchrotron formula characterized by Eq. (3.1.15) (Seto II model
[47]):
dw 
dm
  dE   F hom w
(3.1.22)
d
dE
dm





e
m0

[1   f (F hom )]  g  g   g (F hom ) 
[1   f (F hom )]2  [ g (F hom )]2

 
2!

(3.1.23)

m0 0  d 2 (w)
d 2 ( w) 

w

w

w
(3.1.24)
x  x  
ec 2  d 2
d 2

F hom  Fex  FMod-LAD is the homogeneous field. When   I QED I cl  q(  ) ,
this set of equations behaves dynamically similar to Eqs. (3.1.16)- (3.1.17) [47].
These models demonstrated the stability of their solutions, and became good
references.
ELI-NP has the potential for carrying out relevant experiments of RR, with
the help of the two 10 PW - over 1022 W/cm2 class lasers and the Gamma-ray
Source - LINAC (GS-LINAC) for highly energetic electron bunches. Moreover,
RR has to be taken into account in all high intensity laser experiments. The recent
models using QED modification show us the running coupling between an electron
and radiation field in high-intensity fields. Therefore, this proposal is not only for
FMod-LAD



25

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S257

the investigation of the energy loss of a radiating electron, but we may also observe
the running coupling of an electron dE by high-fields via the function q(  ) [see
Eq. (3.1.15)]. The experiments of RR will give us a chance to consider the problem
of laser-electron interactions and the physics of an electron model like the Dirac’s
original prospect.
We propose the experimental geometries of the head-on collision between a
10 PW laser beam and 600 MeV / 2.5 GeV / 5.0 GeV electrons for the RR
experiments in ELI-NP. Figure 17 is one of the setups for RA5-RR, combining the
electrons from the GBS LINAC (on a new transport line to E7) and 10 PW laser
beam, in Stage 1.5. We will discuss the technical details in Sect. 3.1.2. This
experiment is based on the observation of two parameters: the minimum energy of
scattered electron/shot and the maximum value of the photon energy. By the
correlation of these two values, one can understand the dynamics of RR.

Figure 17 - Conceptual layout of RA5-RR in Stage 1.5. It will be carried out by the combination of
the 10 PW laser and the GS-LINAC.

Figure 18 - 3D layout of RA5-RR/Pair/Pol experiments in Stage 1.5.

S258

K. Homma et al.

26

3.1.2. Technical Proposal

Before exceeding the numerical results, we provide the experimental setup
as the conclusion of them. From the simulation results, we will classify the models
of radiation reaction (RR) by using a head-on laser-electron interaction. We also
use this setup as the common configuration for RA5-Pair and RA5-Pol
experiments. We need to observe the minimum energy of the scattered electrons
and the maximum energy of the emitted photons from the electrons. The sketch of
this E7 area is Figure 18 and Figure 19. For this setup, a basic requirement is the
synchronization between the 600 MeV electron bunches from the GS-LINAC and
the 10 PW laser pulses, at the sub-ps level. These are also important in the
alignment stage of the setup. In the development contracts for the two 10 PW laser
system and the Gamma Beam System at ELI-NP, there is already foreseen the
possibility of synchronization at the 100 fs level. In addition, we propose these
experiments in E7-Stage 3 employing Laser WakeField Acceleration (LWFA) for
2.5 / 5.0 GeV electron beams, to enter another regime of highly intense field
physics.
In the following we present the elements that form a functional experimental
setup for this physics case (also for the LWFA case). These elements are also
common equipment for other physics cases proposed in the TDR.
The setup is illustrated in Figure 19. We consider to use the electron bunches
from GS-LINAC at M27A magnet in this figure. By using the GS-LINAC, it is
expected a very good beam profile of the electron bunches. Since we consider to
pick up it at the front end of LINAC, the expected electron energy will go up 600720 MeV. Here, we choose 600 MeV for an electron energy.

Figure 19 - Combined 10PW-Laser and GS-LINAC system.

27

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S259

We consider the following setup as the minimum requirement for the
investigations of RR in ELI-NP. By following the paper of [23, 24], we aim the
laser intensity of 1022 W/cm2 by the focusing of a single arm of 10 PW. The
purpose of this experiment is the confirmation of the theoretical model which
described in the previous section. Especially, the QED modification of Eqs.
(3.1.15)- (3.1.17) and (3.1.22) - (3.1.24) follow the analysis based on the Volkov
solution [48]. This solution assumes that the external field should be the planewave, the strong focusing may violate these models. We select the f-number of
10 PW laser as f #  7 with the focal length of 3 m due to this. With this focusing,
the spot size is equal to 5.6 μm and the estimated range of the laser intensity is
(1-2) × 1022 W/cm2 depending on its peak power of 5-10 PW. The other parameters
of the 10 PW laser are basically the standard ones for ELI-NP. The pulse energy,
pulse duration and laser wavelength are 220 J, 22 fs and 820 nm respectively. This
PW-class laser beam enters from E6 area to E7 and is reflected and focused by the
final mirror. Then the beam direction becomes the one of the electron bunches
extracted from the GBS-LINAC line.
For the experiments for the study of RR, the electron energy of 600 MeV is
required, at a repetition rate at M27A magnet of 1 Hz (in case of using the 1 PW at
1 Hz laser beam, 0.016 Hz for the 10 PW beam). This repetition rate makes
radiation safety issues much easier to solve. The charge in the bunch is estimated
the range of 4.5 – 100 pC with 109 − 1010 electrons and the bunch width of 100 μm.
Due to the statistics of the scattering processes, a well-focused electron beam at the
interaction point is required. We take into consideration a beam size of 15 μm.
Depending on the design of the extraction line from M27A magnet, we have the
option of additional electron optics or accelerator modules.
Then an important subject is the synchronization between the 10 PW laser
beam and the LINAC electron bunches. From the facility point of view, both HPLS
and GBS systems foresee the possibility of external electronic synchronization.
We also need to align the electron beam profile with the laser beam with high
precision. We thus propose the optical synchronization/alignment system in E7.
There are two arms of the 10 PW lasers in E7, but for the alignment purposes it
would be beneficial to have available the lower power 1 PW pulses at the higher
repetition rate of 1 Hz. A part of this 1 PW is used for making 90 degree Compton
scattering with electron bunches from LINAC. If the two arms of the laser are
synchronized, with these scheme we can also set the time matching between the 10
PW beams and the LINAC. During the preparations for the experiments, we lead
the remaining portion of the 1 PW – 1 Hz beam to collide head-on with the electron
bunches, in order to scan the electron beam profile. The final focusing mirror for
this will be located on moving stage remotely controlled for the scanning of the
beam profile.

S260

K. Homma et al.

28

3.1.3. Estimation of Count Rate

In RA5-RR, the most interesting point is the choice of appropriate RR model
in the regime of ELI-NP. Table 5 is the list of models which we consider in the
present phase, the where symbols LL, CSok, QSok, SZK and Seto II stand for
Landau-Lifshitz [39], Sokolov (classical) [41], Sokolov (quantum) [44], SetoZhang-Koga models [45] and the Seto II model [47] respectively. We have
performed numerical simulations for tracking a radiating electron and the radiation
spectrum in order to evaluate the model dependency of laser-beam interactions. In
the spectrum estimation, the quantum emission spectrum [42] is employed for SQ
and Seto II models while the classical emission spectrum [29] is used for the other
models.
Table 5
Models of RR. The hatched columns include the QED-based modifications.

Model name
Landau-Lifshitz
[LL],
Eq. (3.1.12)

Equation

d 
e
w  eFex w  02 w w   Fex
d
c
2
e
 40 (c 2 Fex Fex  w  Fex Fex  w w w  )
c m0

m0

Sokolov (classical)
[CSok],
Eqs. (3.1.13)-(3.1.14)
Sokolov (quantum)
[QSok],
Eqs. (3.1.16)-(3.1.17)
Seto-Zhang-Koga
[SZK],
Eqs.(3.1.18) -(3.1.19)

dp 
e
q(  ) I cl 

g Fex [ p  q(  ) 0 f ex ] 
p
d
m0
m0 2 c 2

Seto II
[Seto II]
Eqs.(3.1.22) -(3.1.24)

[1   f (F hom )]  F hom  

 
dw 
e    g (F hom ) F hom 

w
d
m0 [1   f (F hom )]2  [ g (F hom )]2

dp 
e
I

g Fex ( p   0 f ex )  2cl 2 p 
d
m0
m0 c

d 
e
w 
( Fex  FLAD  ) w
d
m0 [1   f ( FLAD )]

29

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S261

Figure 20 - Configuration of an electron scattering by a pulse laser.

We consider the following experiments: the peak intensity of the laser is
I  1.0  1022 W / cm2 by spot size S P  5.6 μm for 5 PW with pulse duration
TP  22 fsec and wavelength   820 nm . The incident electron energy is
E  600 MeV provided by LINAC. Figure 20 is a diagram illustrating the
configuration of electron scattering along with the definition of relevant angles:
electron incident angle  L , electron scattering angle  e , and photon detection angle
 .
Figures 21 and 22 show the electron orbits and the time evolution of electron
energy calculated based on SZK, LL, CSok, QSok and Seto II models. Here, the
case of the head-on collision, i.e.,  L  0 , is considered. As shown in Figure 21,
the incident electron starts to oscillate under the action of laser electromagnetic
field as it approaches the pulse laser. The electron tends to decelerate toward the
direction of laser propagation (  x direction) during the oscillation by light
pressure. The electron eventually exhibits different dynamics according to the
employed RR model and passes away into the distance with a certain scattering
angle. As shown in Figure 22, the electron energy decreases drastically due to RR
during the oscillation phase. The asymptotic value of electron energy considerably
depends on the employed RR models. Scattered electron energy is estimated for
various beam incident angles  L . We recognize two model groups from the final
energies of an electron. The three models of LL, CSok and SZK are overlapped
each other. And also QSok and Seto II are overlapped.
Figure 23 shows the scattered electron energy as a function of incident
electron angle for each RR model. The electron energy decreases considerably
from the initial beam energy, 600 MeV, due to radiation damping in any incident
angles. Typical electron energy loss ranges from approximately 300 MeV for QSok
and Seto II model to approximately 400 MeV for SZK, LL and CSok model.
Therefore, evidence of RR could be observed from the scattered electron energy. In

S262

K. Homma et al.

30

addition, dependency of scattered electron energy on RR model becomes obvious
as the incident angle becomes large.

Figure 21 - Trajectory of a 600 MeV electron head-on colliding with the 1×1022 W/cm2 laser pulse.
(b) and (c) are the close-up figures of (a).

31

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S263

Figure 22 - Time evolution of electron energy. An electron of the initial energy of 600 MeV head-on
collides with the 1×1022 W/cm2 laser pulse. Due to radiation from an electron, we can find the energy
drop of it and it represents the effect of RR. (b) and (c) are the close-up figures of (a).

S264

K. Homma et al.

32

Figure 23 - Scattered electron energy vs. laser incident angle.

Figure 24 - Electron scattering angle vs. laser incident angle.

Figure 24 shows electron scattering angle estimated for various incident
angles. The incident electron energy in the present case is large enough so that the
electrons pass through the pulse laser without significant deflections.
Returning to the topic of the head-on collision case  L  0 , Figure 25 shows
angle distribution of photon energy per one incident beam electron. This
calculation was carried out by using the angular resolution d  2 211 . Emitted
photon energy is confined to small angles around the beam front direction,   0
because parallel emission is dominant for high-energy electron (the spread angle of
radiation is d ~ ( Eelectron / m0c2 )1 , strong directivity). The emission angle
distribution broadens up to   O(10 ) , which is wider than the angle distribution
of scattered electron. This is because photon emission from oscillating electron
directly contributes to the emission angle distribution. Thus, the emission spectrum
measurement might provide an excellent indication for the model dependency of
RR.

33

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S265

Figure 25 - Angular distributions of emitted photon energy in the case of the 1×1022 W/cm2 laser and
a 600 MeV electron. The calculation resolution of the detection angle is dθ=2π/211.

3.2. The e+e− pair production in the Extremely Non-linear regime (RA5-Pair)
3.2.1. Introduction

Typical consequence of quantum electrodynamics (QED) is electron-positron
pair production. Especially, pair production only by photons is attractive as a
conversion process between matters and vacuum. There is a long history of
theoretical work on this process from the beginning of QED. However
experimental verification is not sufficient for these theories since it is difficult to
realize the light source with enough energy to produce the electron-positron pairs.
There are several processes to realize the pair production in vacuum. One is
the Breit-Wheeler process derived from perturbation theory of QED [49]. Highenergy photons interact with each other and are converted into particle pairs. The
threshold is determined by the total energy of the interacting two photons. The
other is spontaneous pair production in a background electromagnetic field [50].
This process should be considered in the non-perturbative regime under the action
of numerous photon interactions, which is not understood compared to the
perturbative regime. The threshold is determined by the background field strength
and is still far from the available laser intensities.
Fortunately, we can approach some part of the non-perturbative regime, i.e.,
strong-field QED, via a combined scheme: interaction between a strong laser field
and high-energy photons [51]. Detailed cross sections have been obtained
theoretically based on the semi-classical approach. The theory indicates that stateof-the-art intense lasers can potentially achieve the near threshold condition of pair

S266

K. Homma et al.

34

production. Possible pair production experiment in ELI-NP is considered to
provide a proof of the strong-field QED.
In this proposal, we consider a simple experimental configuration similar to
that of the previous experiment, SLAC E-144 [52]. The SLAC experiment is one of
the few experimental examples on the pair production in laser fields. It is shown
that SLAC and ELI-NP could approach different regimes of pair production, being
complementary in the exploration of strong-field QED.
3.2.2. Physics Case

We describe several pictures of pair production in vacuum and their relevance
to the present experiment in ELI-NP. Perturbation theory of QED derives pair
production due to collision of two energetic photons. This is called Breit-Wheeler
(BW) pair production [49]. Field energy associated with its strength also becomes
an energy source of particle pair. Low frequency and strong field limit suggests
spontaneous pair production from a constant but intense electromagnetic field [53,
50]. In the framework of QED, this process is regarded as a pair production from
numerous low energy photons interacting simultaneously. Pair production in strong
field is therefore not fully explored since non-perturbative treatment is required.
The spontaneous pair production is illustrated as a tunneling process in
vacuum. Particles in the negative energy region can pass through the steep
potential structure of background field by tunneling effect to reach the positive
energy region. Probability of the tunneling process is estimated by using a typical
electric field, i.e., Schwinger field ES ~ mc2 e , where  denotes Compton
wavelength. Resulting probability, PS , is given as
E 

PS  exp   S 
(3.2.1)
E 

stands for the strength of background electric field [50]. The exponential
dependency is a consequence of the tunneling effect.
Figure 26 shows typical diagrams of the pair production from high-energy
photons. Panels (A) and (B) indicate single-photon and multi-photon BW processes
[54], respectively. Threshold of single-photon BW process is determined by total
photon energy in the center of mass system (CMS) of generated particle pair. The
characteristic parameter,  is
s
(3.2.2)
  th , sth  4mc 2 , s  4L
s
where sth and s are the minimum energy required for pair production and total
photon energy in CMS, respectively, while  and  L are photon energies. Headon collision is assumed here. Threshold of single photon BW process is given by
 1.

35

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S267

Figure 26 - Diagrams of typical pair production processes involving energetic photons. (A) singlephoton BW process. Two photons γ1 and γ2 interact each other. (B) multi-photon BW process. N
photons γ1 … γ2 interact each other. (C) Pair production from energetic photon γh in strong field.
Double lines indicate dressed particle.

For sub threshold case   1 , particle pair can be generated only via multiphoton BH process. If additional photons come from a laser field, minimum
number of interacting photon to produce one particle pair, N min , is estimated by
eE
N min ~  (1  a 2 ), a 
(3.2.3)
L mc
where a is normalized vector potential of laser and  L is now laser frequency [52].
Required photon energy is quite large for single BW process in laser fields since
laser frequency is small. For example, minimum photon energy is approximately
100 GeV for laser energy approximately 1 eV.
Figure 26 (C) represents pair production in strong field. Double lines stand for
dressed electrons (or positrons) interacting with vast number of photons in external
field [55]. Although the pair production is essentially non-perturbative, semiclassical approach can be applied for pair production triggered by an energetic
photon in strong-field – stimulated pair production. Contribution of external field is
exactly included in the dynamics of dressed particles [42, 48] and perturbative
interaction is considered between the energetic photon and the dressed particles.
Photon interaction in semi-classical regime is characterized by the quantum
parameter  ,

 e
(3.2.4)
  2  fL  fL  2
( F  p )2
mc
mc mc
where  , F  and p denote Compton wavelength, field 4-tensor and 4momentum of photon, respectively. Pair production cross section, W pair ( ,  ) , is
then

S268

K. Homma et al.

36

Table 6
Parameters of the available laser output

SLAC
E-144
ELI-NP
(LINAC)
ELI-NP
(LWFA)

χ

electron

electron

laser

photon

E/Es

energy

number

intensity

energy

(Spontane

[GeV]

[×109]

[W/cm2]

[GeV]

ous)

46.6

5

< 30

< 10-5

̴5

< 0.20

0.2

0.6

1

< 0.35

< 10-3

105-6

< 0.25

(̴1)

2.5

0.1

< 1.5

< 10-3

105-6

< 1.00

( > 104 )

dWpair ( ,  )

1018
(0.4)
1022
(70)
1022
(70)

Nmin
(multiphoton)

(strong
field)

positron
number



 m 2 c 4     
(3.2.5)
   K 2 3    ds K1 3 ( s ) 
d
3 h h    

where  , h and  h are fine structure and Plank constants and photon energy,
respectively.  ( ) denotes ratio of positron (electron) energies to photon energy,
i.e.,    e  h and   1   .  is defined by   2 3  1   [48, 56]. Total
cross section grows exponentially for  larger than 1. Probability of pair
production is roughly estimated as [57],
 81
(3.2.6)
P  exp  

 3
This formulation invokes the tunneling effects as in the spontaneous pair
production however the probability is determined by  , not E ES .
We consider the relevance of above mentioned pair production processes to the
experiments in ELI-NP [58] while comparing that in SLAC E-144 [52] experiment.
Experimental parameters are summarized in Table 6 (left three columns: electron
energy, number of electron per bunch and laser intensity (normalized potential).
For ELI-NP, we consider two types of electron bunch. One is electron bunch from
LINAC with energy of 600 MeV. The other is generated via laser wakefield
acceleration. Considered electron energy is 2500 MeV [59]. Energy range of seed
photon (the forth column) is roughly estimated by the energy spectrum of photon
emitted from the incident electron bunch (experimental data for SLAC and
simulation date for ELI-NP).



37

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S269

We estimate three typical parameters characterizing above-mentioned three
pair production processes. Head-on collision between seed photon and pulse laser
is assumed here. The first parameter E ES on spontaneous pair production
(Eq.(3.2.1)) is quite small (less than 10-3) even for ELI-NP as shown in the fifth
column. Therefore, spontaneous pair production is still negligible. The second
parameter N min in the sixth column is required photon number in multi-photon BW
process (Eq.(3.2.3)). N min is quite different between ELI-NP (approximately
105-106) and SLAC (approximately 5). This estimation indicates that pair
production could take place only in highly non-perturbative regime in ELI-NP
while multi-photon process with a few photons is dominant in SLAC.
Despite this large difference of physical regime, the quantum parameter
(Eq.(3.2.4)) in ELI-NP (600 MeV LINAC) has a value relatively close to that in
SLAC, as shown in the seventh column. The quantum parameter is here estimated
by   ( E Es )( E mc2 ) , where E is seed photon energy. Thus similar pair
production rate is expected in strong field QED under the contribution of different
number of laser photons.
Finally, generated positron number per electron bunch is given in the eighth
column (observed positron number for SLAC and simulation results for ELI-NP).
The simulation is based on the cross section described in Eq. (3.2.5). The expected
positron number for 600 MeV electron beam is similar to the result of SLAC, as
indicated in the quantum parameter. For 2.5 GeV case, the positron number
increases significantly (greaterer than 104) compared to the other cases. This is a
consequence of the exponential growth of pair production probability as in
Eq. (3.2.6). Precise measurements of pair production rate and careful comparison
with the result of SLAC experiment could provide a proof of the strong field QED.
3.2.3. Technical Proposal

The requirements and the experimental setup are identical to the ones for the
experiments of radiation reaction, without any difference. For observing the e+e−
pairs, removing the beryllium window as the  -pairs converter (GPC).
3.2.4. Count Estimation

We estimate the pair production rate in the collision between electron beam
and intense pulse laser. The estimation is based on a numerical simulation
employing the cross sections of radiation and pair production. The cross sections
are,



dWrad (e ,  )  mc 2  
1

 2  K 2 3 ( ) 
  dsK5 3 ( s )   1  e 
d e
1  e
3  




S270

K. Homma et al.

dWpair ( ,  )

38



 m 2 c 4     
(3.2.7)
   K 2 3 ( )   dsK1 3 ( s ) 
d
3  h    

where Wrad and W pair are the cross section of radiation and pair production,
respectively.  ,  e and  ( ) are the quantum parameter, ratio of emitted photon
energy to incident electron energy and ratio of positron (electron) energy to
incident photon energy, respectively.  is defined as   2 3  e [(1  e )  ] for
radiation and   2 3  1 (  ) for pair production.
The experimental configuration is the same as that in RA5-RR. The primary
process is again high-energy photon emission and its back reaction of electrons.
The pair production is seeded by the emitted photons. That is, the pair production
takes place as a two-step process,
(1) e  N  L  e    L
(3.2.8)
(2)  h  N  L  e  e
where  h ,  L and N denote high energy photon, laser photon and absorbed
number of laser photon, respectively. In the present situation, particle pair is also
generated via direct interaction between electron and laser field without highenergy real photon (trident pair production) [60-62]. Probability of this process is
expected to be quite small compared to the two-step process. Thus this process is
neglected in the simulation.



Figure 27 - Energy spectrum of emitted photon, absorbed photon and generated positron. Electron
beam energy is 600 MeV. Energy bin size is 10 MeV.

39

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S271

Physical condition considered for the simulations are as explained in RA5-RR.
Laser intensity, pulse duration, spot size are 1022 W/cm2, 22 fs and 5 m,
respectively. Electron beam is obtained from accelerator and typical energy is
600 MeV. The other is obtained by using plasma wake field acceleration and
energy is 2500 MeV.
Figure 27 shows the simulation results. The lines indicate energy spectrum of
emitted photon, absorbed photon and generated positron. In this case, the quantum
parameter is not so large (less than 0.25). Thus only small fractions of high-energy
photons with energies in the range of 200-450 MeV are absorbed in the laser field,
as shown in the purple line. Positron energy is roughly half of the absorbed photon
energy, i.e., in the range of 100-300 MeV. Total number of positron per one
electron beam (109 incident electrons) are approximately 1.

4. FUTURE EXTENSION: STAGE 2, 3 AND 4
Given the successful implementation of laser plasma acceleration, we can
further plan the following upgrades or add new subjects as indicated in Figure 28.
“Stage 2” experiment is the realization of an all-optical table-top gammagamma collider at E4 (RA5-GG) to verify the QED-based elastic gamma-gamma
scattering. This utilizes the same interaction chamber as that used for RA5-DM at
E4. This proposal requires 210 MeV electrons by means of laser plasma
acceleration (Research and Development topic).
“Stage 3” experiments essentially repeat the same measurements as those in
the stage 1.5 with upgraded electron energies by means of laser plasma
acceleration. Moreover, we aim at the production of linearly polarized 1 GeV
gamma-ray source via the extremely nonlinear inverse Compton process with
5.0 GeV electrons for the next stage.
“Stage 4” experiment is measurement of vacuum birefringence (RA5-VBir)
via the depolarization of linearly polarized energetic probe photons due to the
effect of non-perturbative QED interactions in a focused high-intensity laser field.
Two ideas for further research were also proposed to ELI-NP and fit best the
experimental setup in E7: i) Thomson backscattering in the extended lambda cubed
regime for extension of the available gamma energy above 100 MeV range (D.
Ursescu et al.) and ii) Compton backscattering using X-ray lasers for the extension
of the available monochromatic gamma energy in the 400 MeV range (D. Ursescu
et al.).

S272

K. Homma et al.

40

Figure 28 - Experimental setup of E7 – Stages 3 and 4.

Acknowledgments. The authors wish to express their appreciation to Prof. Dietrich Habs for
his great contribution to the entire ELI-NP project starting from early stage of proposal and for his
continuous support. OT, LDA and KS were supported by the Project Extreme Light Infrastructure Nuclear Physics (ELI-NP) - Phase I, a project co-financed by the Romanian Government and
European Union through the European Regional Development Fund.

REFERENCES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

P. Mohr et al., Phys. Lett. B 488, 127 (2000).
H. Utsunomiya, P. Mohr, A. Zilges, M. Rayet, Nucl. Phys. A 777, 459 (2006).
R. Capote et al., Nucl. Data Sheets 110, 3107 (2009).
D.M. Brink, Ph.D. thesis, Oxford University, 1955.
D. Belic et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 5242 (1999).
S. Goko et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 192501 (2006).
E. Esarey, C. B. Schroeder, and W. P. Leemans, Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, Phys. Rev. D 90, 1229
(2009).
R. D. Peccei and H. R. Quinn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 38, 1440 (1977); S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett.
40, 223 (1978); F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 40, 271 (1978).

41
9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.

Combined laser gamma experiments at ELI-NP

S273

Y. Fujii and K. Maeda, The Scalar-Tensor Theory of Gravitation Cambridge Univ. Press (2003);
Mark P. Hertzberg, Max Tegmark, and Frank Wilczek, Phys. Rev. D 78, 083507 (2008);
Olivier Wantz and E. P. S. Shellard, Phys. Rev. D 82, 123508 (2010).
K. Homma, D. Habs, T. Tajima, Appl. Phys. B 106:229-240 (2012), (DOI: 10.1007/s00340-0114567-3), arXiv:1103.1748 [hep-ph].
T. Tajima and K. Homma, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A vol. 27, No. 25, 1230027 (2012).
Kensuke Homma, Takashi Hasebe, KazukiKume, Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys. 2014, 083C01 (2014).
K. Ehret et al. (ALPS Collab.), Phys. Lett. B 689, 149 (2010).
E. G. Adelberger et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 131104 (2007); D. J. Kapner et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.
98, 021101 (2007).
J. Chiaverini et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 151101 (2003).
S. J. Smullin et al., Phys. Rev. D 72, 122001 (2005) [Erratum-ibid. D 72, 129901 (2005)].
S. K. Lamoreaux, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 5 (1997) [Erratum-ibid. 81:5475 (1998)].
See the parametrization, for example, in the section AXIONS AND OTHER SIMILAR
PARTICLES in J. Beringer et al. (Particle Data Group), Phys. Rev. D 86, 010001 (2012). And
also see S. L. Cheng, C. Q. Geng, and W. T. Ni, Phys. Rev. D 52, 3132 (1995) on the possible
range of the ratio on the electromagnetic to color anomaly factors of the axial current
associated with the axion, E/N.
J. E. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 103 (1979); M. A. Shifman, A. I. Vainshtein and V. I. Zakharov,
Nucl. Phys. B 166, 493 (1980).
K. Seto, J. Koga, S. Zhangm Review of Laser Engineering, 42, 2, 174 (2014).
G.A. Mourou, N.J. Fisch, V.M. Malkin, Z.Toroker, E.A. Khazanov, A.M. Sergeev, T.Tajima and
B.LeGarrec, Opt. Comm. 720 285 (2012).
D. Habs, T. Tajima and V. Zamfir, Nuclear Physics News 21, 23 (2011).
J. Koga, Phys. Rev. E 70 046502 (2004).
A. Zhidkov, J. Koga, A. Sasaki and M. Uesaka, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 18 (2001).
H. A. Lorentz, The Theory of Electrons and Its Applications to the Phenomena of Light and
Radiant Heat, A Course of Lectures Delivered in Columbia Univ., New York, in March and
April 1906, 2nd edition (Teubner, Leipzig, 1916).
M. Abraham, Theorie der Elektrizität: ElektromagnetischeTheorie der Strahlung, (Teubner,
Leipzig, 1905).
P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy Soc. A 167, 148 (1938).
J. Larmor, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London A, 190, 205 (1897).
J. D. Jackson, Classical Electro-dynamics, 3rd Ed. (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1998).
W. K. H. Panofski and M. Phillips, Classical Electricity and Magnetism, 1st edition (Addison Wesley Publishing Inc., Cambridge, 1961).
Shinichiro Tomonaga, Prog. Theor. Phys. 1, 27 (1946).
J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 74, 1439 (1948).
R. Feynman, Phys. Rev. 76, 769 (1949).
A. Liénard, L’Éclaiarge Électrique 16, 5-14, 53-59, 106-112 (1898).
E. Wiechert, Annalen der Physik 309, 667 (1901).
G. Farmelo, THE STRANGEST MAN The hidden Life of Paul Dirac, Quantum Genius, Ch. 21,
(Faber and Faber, London, 2009).
Proc. Roy Soc. A 194, 543 (1948).
G. W. Ford and R. F. O’Connell, Phys. Lett. A 174, 182-184 (1993).
L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, The Classical theory of fields (Pergamon, New York, 1994).
F. A. Rohrlich, Phys. Lett. A 283, 276 (2001).
I. V. Sokolov, J. Exp. Theo. Phys. 109, No.2 (2009).
A. I. Nikishov, V. I. Ritus, Sov. Phys. JETP 19, 529(1964).
A. A. Sokolov and I. M. Ternov, “Radiation from Relativistic Electrons”, American Institute of
Physics (translation series, 1986).
I. V. Sokolov, N. M. Naumova and J. A. Nees, Phys. Plasma 18, 093109 (2011).

S274

K. Homma et al.

42

45. K. Seto, S. Zhang, J. Koga, H. Nagatomo, M. Nakai and K. Mima, Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys 2014,
043A01 (2014), also arXiv:1310.6646v3, (2013).
46. K. Seto, Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys 2015, 023A01 (2015), also arXiv: 1405.7346v4 (2014).
47. K. Seto, Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys 2015, 103A01 (2015), arXiv: 1502. 05319v4.
48. D. M. Volkov, Z. Phys. 94, 250 (1935).
49. G. Breit and J. A. Wheeler, Phys. Rev. 46, 1087 (1934).
50. J. S. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 82, 664 (1951).
51. R. Schutzhold et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 130404 (2008).
52. C. Bamber, S. J. Boege, T. Koffas et al, Phys. Rev. D 60, 092004 (1999)。
53. J. Sauter, Phys. Rev. 82, p. 664 (1951).
54. H. R. Reiss, J. Math. Phys. 3, 59 (1962).
55. W.H. Furry, Phys.Rev, 81, 115, (1951).
56. V. B. Berestetskii, E. M. Lifshits, and L. P. Pitaevskii, Quantum Electrodynamics (Pergamon,
New York, 1982).
57. N.B. Narozhnyi, Sov. Phys. JETP 27, 360 (1968).
58. L. Ionela and D. Ursescu, Laser and Particle Beams 32, 89 (2014).
59. N. Nakajima, Eur. Phys. J. Special Topics 223, 999–1016 (2014).
60. A. Ilderton, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 020404 (2011).
61. H. Hu, Carsten Müller and C. H. Keitel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 080401 (2010).
62. B. King and C. H. Keitel, New J. Phys. 14, 103002 (2012).

